---
slug: hy5
status: proof
title: HY5
type: workshop
submission_type: Workshop
time: 14:00 - 16:00
contributors:
- person: $davis-ted

---

# $PROGRAM_NOTE

HY5 bridges the gap between two creative coding tools, Hydra-Synth and p5.js,
two Javascript libraries which make programming shaders and compositions
more accessible. It effortlessly shares visuals between them, enabling the bending
of graphics (p5 » hydra), use of textures onto 3D objects (hydra » p5), or wild
post-processing (hydra » p5 » hydra). With additional features to toggle canvas
layer order and extract Hydra-Synth’s multiple outputs for separate rendering,
HY5 enhances generative design possibilities. The open-source tool exists as a
standalone Javascript library and HY5LIVE, a live-coding editor, which compiles
code smoothly between both libraries.
This workshop will get participants up and running with the HY5 workflow.
This include intro inputs in both p5.js and hydra-synth to get familiar with how
each libary works. Then a focus will be made on the bridging functions to pass
visuals between the two environments

# $ABSTRACT

HY5 bridges the gap between two creative coding tools, Hydra-Synth and p5.js, two Javascript libraries which make programming shaders and compositions more accessible. It effortlessly shares visuals between them, enabling the bending of graphics (p5 » hydra), use of textures onto 3D objects (hydra » p5), or wild post-processing (hydra » p5 » hydra). With additional features to toggle canvas layer order and extract Hydra-Synth’s multiple outputs for separate rendering, HY5 enhances generative design possibilities. The open-source tool exists as a standalone Javascript library and HY5LIVE, a live-coding editor, which compiles code smoothly between both libraries.

This workshop will get participants up and running with the HY5 workflow. This include intro inputs in both p5.js and hydra-synth to get familiar with how each libary works. Then a focus will be made on the bridging functions to pass visuals between the two environments.

